for years the United States has been
regarded as a global superpower and in
recent decades a key partner to India
India and the United States have shared
a complex relationship over the years
ranging from periods of tension to
recent strategic Partnerships today many
see the us as a special partner to India
especially in counterbalancing China's
influence in Asia however behind this
warm friendship a deeper pattern emerges
one where the US often places its
strategic interests above all even if it
means compromising those of its allies
while the United States claims to be the
flagbearer of freedom and democracy it
has a long history of intervention in
Nations that challenge its Global
dominance sometimes leaving behind
instability and turmoil for India an
emerging Global power these actions
raise a critical question could the US
with its influence and hidden agendas
end up being a bigger threat to India
than its Asian rival China at this stage
in India's Journey this question is more
relevant now than ever before the United
States has a track record of fueling and
profiting from conflicts Often by
providing arms to Regions on the brink
of war the US arms industry is one of
the most powerful in the world with
exports reaching record highs of $238
billion in
2023 the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute ranks the us as the
largest arms exporter globally providing
weapons to over a 100 countries some of
whom face complex geopolitical threats
by selling arms to these nations the US
doesn't just strengthen its economy it
secures influence over these countries
security policies for example in Ukraine
the US supplied weapons and military aid
as tensions with Russia escalated as of
October 2024 it has provided nearly $64
billion in military aid to Ukraine since
the conflict began this financial
dependency ties Ukraine's security
directly to the US maintaining a cycle
of reliance that keeps us arms flowing
into Ukraine and its strategic influence
intact US President Joe Biden has
cleared Ukraine to use us provided
missiles to strike deep into Russian
territory the United States has a
well-documented history of overthrowing
leaders it perceives as threats to its
interests often in the name of Freedom
or
democracy take Iran in 1953 when the CIA
orchestrated a coup against the
democratically elected prime minister
Muhammad mosad
mosad had nationalized Iran's oil a move
that threatened Western Oil interests
particularly those of British and
American companies Operation Ajax as it
was called replaced mosad with a regime
that aligned with us interests another
example is the 1973 coup in Chile Where
the US government played a covert role
in overthrowing President Salvador
alende through the CIA the US backed
General austo Pinos whose authoritarian
rule led to years of human rights abuses
Declassified documents reveal the extent
of us involvement and the cia's efforts
to prevent allende's rise reflecting a
pattern of supporting regimes that
prioritize us interests regardless of
the human cost these operations are
carried out on the back of a massive
military presence with around 750
military bases in over 80 countries many
of these are strategically positioned
across Asia particularly in Japan and
South Korea where the US maintains a
constant presence to counterbalance
China's influence closer to India recent
developments in Bangladesh have raised
serious concerns Bangladesh's St
Martin's Island near the Bay of Bengal
holds immense strategic value reports
suggest that the US has shown interest
in establishing a military base on the
island potentially enabling it to
closely monitor India's Naval activities
and nuclear submarine program if the US
succeeds in gaining a military foothold
in Bangladesh it will change the
Strategic calculus for India bringing US
military influence directly into India's
backyard new delhi's strategic autonomy
could face new challenges as American
interests align less with that of India
and more with exerting its influence
over the region one prominent example of
US policies conflicting with Indian
interests is the shelter provided to
separatists like gurpatwant sing panon a
vocal proponent of Kalani separatism
panon who holds US citizenship has
called for the secession ession of
Indian state of Punjab undermining
India's territorial Integrity such
anti-india elements finding refuge on us
soil raises serious questions about
American intentions especially as these
individuals openly support divisive
agendas against India another such
example involves David Hedley a
Pakistani American involved in the 2008
Mumbai Terror attacks Hedley who
conducted surveillance for the attack
was arrested in the US but despite
requests for extradition
he was never handed over to India
instead Headley struck a plea deal with
the US authorities receiving a reduced
sentence in exchange for cooperation
which shielded him from prosecution in
India this reluctance by the United
States in supporting New Delhi on
critical security issues exposes
Washington's selective approach to
Justice when us interests are at stake
despite claiming to be a flagbearer of
democracy Washington has often shown
support for authoritarian regimes where
own strategic interests took precedence
over Democratic Values this was
particularly evident during the 1971
Indo Pac War a conflict stemming from
widespread atrocities committed by the
Pakistani military in East Pakistan now
Bangladesh despite India's intervention
to stop human rights abuses in East
Pakistan Washington chose to support
Pakistan an authoritarian regime at the
time to maintain ties with China
Declassified documents reveal that the
US even sent the US SS Enterprise to the
Bay of Bengal as a show of force
signaling support for Pakistan this
episode serves as a reminder of how the
US has at times prioritized its
geopolitical goals over Democratic
alliances creating lasting distrust
between India and the US no I've dealt
with India too Charles I got to say I've
dealt with India too I've talked with
Modi India wants to be a partner with us
they don't want to be a partner with
Russia the problem is India doesn't
trust us to win they don't trust us to
lead they see right now that we're weak
India has always played it smart even
decades later these priorities have
affected how the US engages with India
particularly in defense cooperation
while India has since Diversified its
Partnerships the Reliance on us defense
technology reveals new challenges often
limiting India's autonomy you see the US
remains a significant arms supplier to
India but this relationship has often
resulted in delays restrictions and
strategic setbacks a classic example is
the long delay in supply of engines for
India's indigenous teos fighter jet a
project critical for reducing its
Reliance on foreign aircraft in 2021
India signed a deal with General
Electric for these engines but recurring
delays have slowed the modernization
efforts of the Indian Air Force
historically the US has a pattern of
obstructing India's access to military
technology during the 1970s American
intell Ence closely monitored India's
nuclear facilities and sought to prevent
India from conducting nuclear tests more
recently the defense agreements between
India and the US have raised concerns
about restrictions on India's
operational autonomy for instance the
deal for Apache and chinuk helicopters
valued at $3 billion was signed in 2015
prior to the 2018 Communications
compatibility and security agreement
however with the signing of kamassa all
us origin platforms including these
helicopters are now equipped with secure
communication systems provided by the US
sparking concerns over potential
monitoring capabilities and their
implications for India's strategic
Independence such dependency on American
defense systems can become a
vulnerability if Supply chains are
interrupted due to political shifts or
diplomatic
tensions the US has long been involved
in shaping Regional Dynamics around
India and its recent stance on the
Kalani issue feels like part of a bigger
strategy recently the US has responded
strongly to two incidents involving
Kalani separatists Hardeep Singh Najar
and gurpatwant sing panun after najar's
killing in Canada which Canada alleged
involved Indian agents the US supported
Canada's position as part of the five
eyes Alliance indirectly pressuring
India to cooperate around the same time
reports emerged of an alleged plot to
kill gatan Singh panon a prominent
us-based Kalani separatist which the US
condemned emphasizing its commitment to
protect individuals on its soil even
those with anti-india agendas these
cases highlight how the US may be
leveraging the Kalani issue to push
India toward a more Western aligned
stance particularly on key issues like
the Russia Ukraine war India has so far
maintained a neutral stance focusing on
its own strategic interests rather than
taking sides which has created friction
with the West at the same time India's
involvement in bricks a block that
includes China and Russia is Raising
concerns in Western capitals with bricks
exploring alternatives to the US
dominated Financial System including a
potential brics currency India's
independent positioning threatens United
States economic hegemony by raising the
Kalani issue the us could be signaling
that India's choices on global matters
will have consequences subtly pressuring
India to reconsider its alliances in
many ways this feels like an attempt to
pull India away from a more autonomous
path and make it fall in line with
Western interests especially as India's
influence on the world stage continues
to grow while the US has been a strong
partner to India in several respects
it's clear that its history of
intervention and influence raises
important questions about the future of
India us relations as India strives to
become a self-reliant Global power it
must carefully weigh the costs and
benefits of this relationship should
India trust the us unconditionally or is
it time to adopt a more cautious
approach let us know your thoughts in
the comments below thank you for
watching and don't forget to like And
subscribe for more in-depth analyses on
India's geopolitical landscape